the quick review of the intro to
genetics on the May 22nd science 10
biology class that's a quick review of
the information only today was the
introduction to genetics a lot of this
is review from what we did in terms of
the cell and mitosis but we're just
going to overview from gene to protein
first definition genetics is the study
of inheritable characteristics
characteristics that you inherit from
your mom or your dad like eye color
height things like that the genetic code
is the chemical language through which
the information needed to produce a
complete organism specifically DNA it's
located in the chromosomes and the
language which is DNA is read to produce
protein protein itself is made up of 20
different amino acids when the amino
acids are linked in different orders and
lengths you get a new protein human DNA
has enough information to code for about
a hundred thousand different kinds of
proteins and almost every cell in your
body contains all the information needed
to produce a new human every single one
of your cells has all of your DNA there
are a few exceptions like red blood
cells which are essentially sacks for
hemoglobin and the nucleus is removed
but by and large every cell in your body
has all the information to code for
everything else it just doesn't use it
all the time in terms of the genetic
code what we're considering first is
what's known in biology as the central
dogma DNA is replicated in the nucleus
that DNA is then transcribed onto RNA
RNA is like a temporary memo it just
copies a small section of the DNA that's
needed to code for a protein that RNA is
what is delivered to the low ribosomes
that are either in the rough endoplasmic
reticulum or so floating in the
cytoplasm and it will translate that
message of RNA into amino acids and
protein
so DNA is replicated in the nucleus it
is copied onto RNA a small copy that RNA
moves into the cytoplasm and the rough
ER where the ribosomes read it and
translate the message into protein that
type of RNA is known as messenger RNA
there are other types of RNA that you'll
become more familiar with in grade 11
and 12 RNA you can think of as the memo
of the original DNA it is not the
complete instruction set but just the
small portion that is needed to code for
one particular protein so as an overview
DNA duplicates itself through a process
of mitosis this is known as a
replication DNA makes is copied as an
RNA copy this is known as transcription
it is transcribed both of these
replication transcription occur in the
nucleus the RNA is moved to the
cytoplasm or a rough endoplasmic
reticulum where ribosomes then translate
the RNA into protein this process is
known as translation a reminder of the
overall structure of DNA is a coiled
helix in which the bases that are on the
inside the order of the basis up here we
can see GTG that order is the actual
code each strand there's some redundancy
there we can predict the code on one
strand given the coding of another
strand a for example always bonds with t
and c always pawns bonds with g so if
for example this was a single strand of
DNA then we could create its pairing a
bonds with t t bones with a tube once
again bonds with a see bonds with g c
bones with g and g bones with c and then
we can complete complete the complete
ladder for a section of DNA the genetic
code of DNA is made of four bases then
cgt and a it is joined in chains and the
jae'nt strands come together in
complementary pairs now there's not
identical pairs it's not T to T or a to
a but they're always the same g always
goes with CC always goes with g same
with t going to a and a going to t so
they're complementary their wound around
each other so that they make a double
helix it's a regular ladder just twisted
and each three base code specifies one
amino acid for example the code tac on
DNA in order would code for the amino
acid methionine once it's translated
into RNA and then brought to the
cytoplasm now why is there a
three-letter code well a three-letter
code imagine you just had the four bases
a T C and G how many amino acids could
you code for well you could only code 44
there's there are approximately 20 amino
acids so this is not enough imagine then
what what could you do to with just if
you just have these four letters how
could you code for more well you could
pair them up so 80 would code for one
amino acid a a could code for another AC
for another and then a G and you could
do this four times ta could code for one
thing TT could go for another T TC and
then teaching and keep going through all
of us for four and then another two sets
of four we could then code for 16 amino
acids this is close but not quite at a
required 20
so in order to get enough we code for
three ay-ay-ay codes for one amino acid
ay ay t ay ay SI ay ay g this will
actually code for 64 different amino
acids there's only about 20 so this is
in excess of what's needed but 16 is not
enough so we need a triplet code I'm
going to stop this video here this is
the first part of the review video form
a 22nd for the science ten genetics
introduction